Ian Ingram
Statement 2013

I have been exploring levels of communication and understanding in
and between non-human animals and human observers.  Each animal,
including the human, experiences the world in a different way due to
the particulars of its body, its senses, its adaptive programming, and
really every part of its make-up.  This experiential whole has been
dubbed the umwelt of a particular animal.  Part of the umwelt is a
sensitivity to particular signals that are meaningful to the animal,
often from members of the same species.  Ants are very attuned to the
chemical trails of their fellows. Songbirds are listening for the
songs of their rivals.  Humans glean great information about others'
internal states from facial expressions.  The world is a cacophony of
signals, most essentially invisible to us.  Arguably, part of the
human umwelt is the application of extra meaning and narrative,
especially anthropomorphic narrative, on the activities of other
animals that we do perceive.

My recent work has been attempts to create a sort of messy web
in the umwelts of specific non-human species and human beings by
creating robotic systems that--in scale, form, behavior and
gesture--make signals truly meaningful to the non-human species but
often in a playful human-like narrative context.  The robots use
computer vision or sound signal processing to search the world for the
signals of target species and then attempt to respond through similar
gestural and audible signalling. The robots are trying to communicate
with the animals and, in part, allow human communion with those
animals in ways that our own bodies and umwelts don't allow.  That
human narrative stamps itself heavily onto the projects is confirmed
by these becoming things like a hermaphroditic sexbot for Pileated
Woodpeckers and a NORAD equivalent for Grey Squirrels.
